@metadata...
title:Introduction
type:intermission
...metadata

@subhead About this book

When I started doing interactive journalism at Congressional Quarterly in 2009, it was an exciting time. Smartphones had started to become widespread, and while apps got much of the attention, it was a sea change for the web. In rapid succession, we learned about responsive design, got amazing new powers via HTML5, and tried to figure out how touchscreen interaction would work in a world previously filled with hover styles and tooltips.

To deal with this extra complexity, newsroom developers often relied on tools and frameworks to bridge the gap between where we wanted browsers to be, and where they actually were. Almost all of us used jQuery, and many of us added D3 (for visualizations) or Underscore and Backbone (for what would become "single-page applications"). We needed these libraries, because while some browsers had switched to a rapid release schedule, others had not, and the specter of IE7 loomed over many of us. Even in the "standards-compliant" browsers, features and performance could vary widely.

Almost ten years later, however, that landscape has changed. These days, the slowest release cycle comes from Safari, which puts out major versions roughly once a year (but still manages minor releases with significant new features in between OS updates). Elsewhere, Chrome and Firefox have continued to sprint ahead, adding new technology that's often inspired by the frameworks of the past. IE was replaced by Edge, which has also moved to an evergreen update cycle. While many of us were head down and working, the web platform became enormously more capable, and consistent, than we might have thought.

As a result, although many of us still reach for D3 or jQuery out of habit, it's often unnecessary. A lot of what once required a hefty library is now built-in to the browser. On the Seattle Times' interactives team, we make it a point of pride to use frameworks sparingly. By leaning on the browser, our pages are lighter (and faster). More importantly, it's a good chance for junior team members to learn how the platform actually works, and develop skills that will transfer across libraries. After all, JavaScript fashions may come and go, but the browser is here for the foreseeable future.

In this book, you'll learn how to build powerful data visualizations in the browser, based on three principles:

* Use the web platform, not frameworks or libraries, whenever possible
* Prioritize data over code
* Have fun, because elegant code should be more enjoyable to write!

Above all, through these short lessons, you should have a chance to level-up as an interactive developer, building the confidence to create your own stories and graphics from scratch. You'll also be in a better position to use frameworks when you need to do so, because you'll understand what's going on under the hood. Who knows? Maybe you'll even write your own. I can't wait to see what you will do!

@subhead About you

I wrote this book with junior newsroom developers in mind: the kinds of young journalists who I've worked with as interns or as producers, who are looking to develop their skills outside of a traditional tech pipeline. The problem with being a young newsroom dev is you're often figuring things out as you go along, without a more experienced developer to guide you. That was certainly the case for me&mdash;I spent most of my time at CQ trying not to do anything incredibly stupid, because even at a fairly tech-savvy newsroom, there wasn't really a more senior data journalist to teach me the ropes. It wasn't until I went to work for a game company, and found myself surrounded by people much smarter and more experienced, that my skills really progressed.

Developers now have a lot of tools that I didn't have, including supportive newsgroups and chatrooms that they can turn to. But that's still no substitute for a good mentor who knows the challenges you're trying to solve. This book won't be a substitute either. But I hope it can fill some of the gaps for the "lonely coders" of the news world.

In the chapters ahead, I assume that you're familiar with the web, and have built at least a few pages. I won't be covering how to set up your HTML file, or what JavaScript is. You should be able to put a page together, and use jQuery without looking at the docs for the easy stuff, but not much more. And if a chapter seems confusing, feel free to skip it and come back later: although they're arranged in a rough reading order, most chapters are independent of each other.

@subhead About the code

For this book, I'm going to be writing in ES2015, a new version of JavaScript that's supported by most modern browsers. However, I won't be using any features that can't be compiled back down to the well-supported ES5 standard using tools like Babel. It's also not hard to translate in your head. For example, the following ES2015 function definition:

@codeblock...

var x = (a = 3, b = 4) => a + b;

...codeblock
would translate to something like this:

@codeblock...

var x = function(a, b) {
  //set default values
  a = a || 3;
  b = b || 4;
  return a + b;
};

...codeblock

To be specific, I'll be using the following ES2015 syntax additions for this book:

* Arrow functions (<var>=&lt;</var>)
* Template strings
* Destructuring
* Enhanced object literals
* Default parameters
* Rest and spread parameters

For more information on writing these and other new features in this version of JavaScript, take a look at the <a href="https://babeljs.io/learn-es2015/">Learn ES2015</a> guide from Babel, a popular tool for transforming new JS features into backward-compatible code for old browsers.

@subhead About the author

Thomas Wilburn is a developer and data journalist on the Seattle Times' interactives team, where he builds graphics, special pages, and newsroom tools using JavaScript. Previously, he ran the multimedia team for Congressional Quarterly, and was a web programmer at ArenaNet working on UI and services for Guild Wars 2. He has been a guest lecturer at the University of Washington, and a speaker at tech and journalism conferences (including NICAR, SRCCON, CascadiaFest, and SeattleJS). 